openvscode-server 1.62 blog post (#1206)
gitpod-io/website: src/routes/blog/vscode-server.md

---

> author: jeanp413, akosyakov, loujaybee

Reviewer: @filiptronicek / @JohannesLandgraf - what's the protocol, because you also helped out here, want to join us on the authors list?

Reviewer: Good to know, thanks ! I thought similar but wanted to double-check!

date: Thursday, 04 Nov 2021 15:00:00 UTC
excerpt: Thanks Microsoft for open-sourcing VS Code Server
image: vscodeserver.jpg
slug: vscode-server
subtitle:
teaserImage: vscodeserver.jpg
title: Thanks Microsoft for open-sourcing VS Code Server 👐
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

**TL;DR**

- After [Gitpod launched OpenVSCode Server](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch) in September, Microsoft now open-sourced the server code powering VS Code remote development and GitHub Codespaces
- Within a few days we switched Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server Insiders builds to the upstream implementation
- Today, we release Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server with these changes

<br>

> When we launched our [history of the last four years of Cloud IDEs](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/cloud-ide-history) on Oct 20, we spoke about the road ahead and wrote:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we launched our [history of the last four years of Cloud IDEs](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/cloud-ide-history) on Oct 20, we spoke about the road ahead:
```

> As VS Code and cloud-based, remote development continue to grow in popularity, we hope to see the server-side implementation powering GitHub Codespaces being open-sourced in the upstream repository by Microsoft.

> A month after [we released OpenVSCode Server](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch), we are excited to see that Microsoft indeed open-sourced their [server implementation](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/commit/822f995357f725216cdee6e05f1f1552ccbbd882) for running VS Code in the browser 🚀. This happened faster than we anticipated - first and foremost we want to say **thank you to the excellent VS Code team**. The community deserves that the most popular developer tool of the planet keeps its open nature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A month after [we released OpenVSCode Server](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch), we are excited to see that Microsoft open-sourced their [server implementation](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/commit/822f995357f725216cdee6e05f1f1552ccbbd882) for running VS Code in the browser 🚀. This happened faster than we anticipated - first and foremost we want to say **thank you to the excellent VS Code team**. The community deserves that the most popular developer tool of the planet keeps its open nature.
```

While [we won’t send them a cake this time 🎂](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/cake), we wanted to share our take on the release, our nightly sync jobs that enable us to run the latest VS Code in Gitpod and the future of OpenVSCode Server.

## Why OpenVSCode Server in the first place?

> In September we announced [OpenVSCode Server](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-server), an open-source project that runs upstream VS Code on a remote machine accessed through a modern web browser. The OpenVSCode Server project is officially backed by our partners from GitLab, VMware, Uber, SAP, Sourcegraph, RStudio, SUSE, Tabnine, Render and TypeFox.

Reviewer: I'm still, not a massive fan of the wording "backed" because of the ambiguity, but I don't have a suggestion at the moment though, so let's not let it block the publishing of the post, I'll try and find out if we have a better option for the phrasing...

Publishing OpenVSCode Server was motivated by the fact that Microsoft hadn’t at the time published any source code for their own implementation of a server that was able to run Visual Studio Code, which Microsoft uses to power GitHub Codespaces and their remote extensions. Since many developers and organisations wanted to run VS Code as a full web application in their daily workflows with the same low-footprint technique used by Gitpod and Codespaces, we decided to [share our own server implementation](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch) with everyone.

## How We Keep Up To Date With VS Code

> As you may know, we provide Insiders builds for Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server. This is thanks to a couple of GitHub actions we’ve set up. We noticed the VS Code Server changes immediately and started working on integrating them. By now, we have been running them in production for more than a week and today we are releasing them for everybody.

Reviewer: In case the reader doesn't know, can we share a link? It would be good if we have proper docs for this in future, I think because it's a nice feature, where's the best place to current link? Just ot the release repo? 

```suggestion
As you may know, [we provide Insiders builds](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-releases) for Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server. This is thanks to a couple of GitHub actions we’ve set up. We noticed the VS Code Server changes immediately and started working on integrating them. By now, we have been running them in production for more than a week and today we are releasing them for everybody.
```

These [GitHub actions](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-releases) run daily to update OpenVSCode Server with the latest upstream changes, run integration, smoke tests, and make a github pre-release along with publishing the updated [docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/openvscode-server) to Docker Hub under the Insiders tag.

This release process allows OpenVSCode Server to get the latest updates from the upstream VS Code code and make new stable releases on the same day as VS Code. We also use the same release process with our VS Code Insiders version that we use inside Gitpod, which enables Gitpod users to go into their gitpod settings and swap their [IDE configuration for the VSCode Insiders](https://gitpod.io/preferences) with the latest features and fixes from VSCode.

## The Future of OpenVSCode Server

> Unfortunately, there’s not a standalone product for VS Code Server yet and while the source code is open-sourced now and you can build it yourself, you cannot use the marketplace as it is restricted to only be used by Microsoft products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, even with this release from Microsoft, there's still no standalone product for VS Code Server yet and while the source code is open-sourced now and you can build it yourself, you cannot use the marketplace as it is restricted to only be used by Microsoft products.
```

> So OpenVSCode Server just adds our own set of minimal changes on top of it to:

Reviewer: Suggestion to remove "just" to make the statement stronger 🙏 

```suggestion
So OpenVSCode Server is still useful, and adds some minimal changes on top of VS Code to:
```

Reviewer 2: Agree to make the statement stronger. However, 'still' also does not really convey strength. How about: 'OpenVSCode Server adds some minimal changes on top of VS Code to: ..'

Reviewer: Agree, I've updated to be: "OpenVSCode Server adds some much-needed, yet minimal changes on top of VS Code to". I'll commit the change, but any further suggestions, feel free to add on top! 🙏

- enable the marketplace using [Open VSX](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/open-vsx)
- enable HTTPS and WebSocket Secure (wss) by default

> Try the new 1.62 OpenVSCode Server today or it’s Insiders version and don’t forget to leave feedback and file any issues you encounter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try the new 1.62 OpenVSCode Server or the insiders version and don’t forget to [leave feedback and file any GitHub issues](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-server) if you need!
```

Reviewer 2: Do we write insiders or Insiders?

Reviewer: Good question @JohannesLandgraf 🤔  Let me revert that part of the suggestion, I'm not sure if we're referring to it as a proper noun. Also kinda confusing as we have an "insiders" and VSCode have an "insiders" 🤔

> You can also quickly explore the latest version of VS Code from within Gitpod, all you have to do is prefix a GitHub URL with `gitpod.io/#https://github.com/example-org/your-repo` (or install the [browser extension](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/browser-extension#browser-extension)) to get started. And why not, [Gitpod is free for up to 50 hours a month](https://www.gitpod.io/pricing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also quickly explore the latest version of VS Code from within Gitpod, all you have to do is prefix a GitHub URL with `gitpod.io/#https://github.com/example-org/your-repo` (or install the [browser extension](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/browser-extension#browser-extension)) to get started. 

And why not, because [Gitpod is free for up to 50 hours a month](https://www.gitpod.io/pricing).
```

---
author: jeanp413, akosyakov, loujaybee
date: Thursday, 04 Nov 2021 15:00:00 UTC
excerpt: Thanks Microsoft for open-sourcing VS Code Server
image: vscodeserver.jpg
slug: vscode-server
subtitle:
teaserImage: vscodeserver.jpg
title: Thanks Microsoft for open-sourcing VS Code Server 👐
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

**TL;DR**

- After [Gitpod launched OpenVSCode Server](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch) in September, Microsoft now open-sourced the server code powering VS Code remote development and GitHub Codespaces
- Within a few days we switched Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server Insiders builds to the upstream implementation
- Today, we release Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server with these changes

<br>

When we launched our [history of the last four years of Cloud IDEs](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/cloud-ide-history) on Oct 20, we spoke about the road ahead:

> > As VS Code and cloud-based, remote development continue to grow in popularity, we hope to see the server-side implementation powering GitHub Codespaces being open-sourced in the upstream repository by Microsoft.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> As VS Code and cloud-based, remote development continues to grow in popularity, we hope to see the server-side implementation powering GitHub Codespaces being open-sourced in the upstream repository by Microsoft.
```

A month after [we released OpenVSCode Server](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch), we are excited to see that Microsoft open-sourced their [server implementation](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/commit/822f995357f725216cdee6e05f1f1552ccbbd882) for running VS Code in the browser—the release happened faster than we anticipated 🚀 ! First and foremost we want to say **thank you to the excellent VS Code team**. The community deserves that the most popular developer tool of the planet keeps its open nature.

While [we won’t send them a cake this time 🎂](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/cake), we wanted to share our take on the release, our nightly sync jobs that enable us to run the latest VS Code in Gitpod and the future of OpenVSCode Server.

## Why OpenVSCode Server in the first place?

In September we announced [OpenVSCode Server](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-server), an open-source project that runs upstream VS Code on a remote machine accessed through a modern web browser. The OpenVSCode Server project is officially backed by our partners from GitLab, VMware, Uber, SAP, Sourcegraph, RStudio, SUSE, Tabnine, Render and TypeFox.

> Publishing OpenVSCode Server was motivated by the fact that Microsoft hadn’t at the time published any source code for their own implementation of a server that was able to run Visual Studio Code, which Microsoft uses to power GitHub Codespaces and their remote extensions. Since many developers and organisations wanted to run VS Code as a full web application in their daily workflows with the same low-footprint technique used by Gitpod and Codespaces, we decided to [share our own server implementation](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch) with everyone.

Reviewer 4: Nit(non-blocking): would be great to split this into 3 or more sentences, I got lost whilst reading them 😕.

Reviewer: @filiptronicek thanks for the feedback 🙏  Could you leave suggestions with the feature where possible for small stuff, as it's easier to accept them and less chance that we misinterpret your suggestion 🙏 

We can split on this sentence, does that make sense? 

```
Publishing OpenVSCode Server was motivated by the fact that Microsoft hadn’t at the time published any source code for their own implementation of a server that was able to run Visual Studio Code, which Microsoft uses to power GitHub Codespaces and their remote extensions. 

Since many developers and organisations wanted to run VS Code as a full web application in their daily workflows with the same low-footprint technique used by Gitpod and Codespaces, we decided to [share our own server implementation](https://www.gitpod.io/blog/openvscode-server-launch) with everyone.

Reviewer: I'll commit, but if you've got other suggestions, stick them back on the diff 🙏

## How We Keep Up To Date With VS Code

As you may know, we provide Insiders builds for Gitpod VS Code and OpenVSCode Server. This is thanks to a couple of GitHub actions we’ve set up. We noticed the VS Code Server changes immediately and started working on integrating them. By now, we have been running them in production for more than a week and today we are releasing them for everybody.

> These [GitHub actions](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-releases) run daily to update OpenVSCode Server with the latest upstream changes, run integration, smoke tests, and make a github pre-release along with publishing the updated [docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/openvscode-server) to Docker Hub under the Insiders tag.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These [GitHub actions](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-releases) run daily to update OpenVSCode Server with the latest upstream changes, run integration and smoke tests, and make a github pre-release along with publishing the updated [docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/openvscode-server) to Docker Hub under the Insiders tag.
```

> These [GitHub actions](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-releases) run daily to update OpenVSCode Server with the latest upstream changes, run integration and smoke tests, and make a github pre-release along with publishing the updated [docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/openvscode-server) to Docker Hub under the Insiders tag.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These [GitHub actions](https://github.com/gitpod-io/openvscode-releases) run daily to update OpenVSCode Server with the latest upstream changes, run integration and smoke tests, and make a GitHub pre-release along with publishing the updated [docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/openvscode-server) to Docker Hub under the Insiders tag.
```
